 
Virtual assistant for the visually impaired 
Vinayak Iyer  
Department of Information Technology 
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology 
Mumbai, India 
vinayak.iyer@spit.ac.in 
Sahil Sheth  
Department of Information Technology 
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology 
Mumbai, India 
sahil.sheth@spit.ac.in 
 Kshitij Shah  
Department of Information Technology 
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology 
Mumbai, India 
kshitij.shah@spit.ac.in 
Kailas Devadkar  
Department of Information Technology 
Sardar Patel Institute of Technology 
Mumbai, India 
kailas_devadkar@spit.ac.in 
 
Abstract—Research shows that people with visual 
impairments are 31% less likely to access the internet than 
individuals without disabilities. This paper illustrates the 
implementation of software that provides assistance to the 
visually impaired for accessing the internet. The software shall 
prove instrumental in the way the internet has accessed and will 
increase the ease of use drastically. Although technology has 
grown leaps and bounds, the internet - especially websites are 
still inaccessible by the visually impaired. The software provides 
a way to interact with these websites with much ease. With the 
use of voice commands instead of the traditional keyboard and 
mouse, our software provides a new dimension to access and 
provide commands to any website. The software will read out the 
content of the website and then using speech to text and text to 
speech modules along with selenium, our software can automate 
any website. The user is free from remembering complex braille 
keyboard commands or the hassle of typing, he/she can simply 
voice out his/her command and the software will execute it. The 
system also has the functionality of providing a summary of the 
content on the website and answering questions asked by the user 
with reference to the summary using a BERT model trained on 
the Stanford Question Answer Dataset. This software will 
revolutionize the internet and pave the way for Web3.0.  
Keywords — Visually impaired; Voice control; automate 
website; blind people  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Today there are nearly 285 million people in the world that 
are visually impaired [12]. Although technology has grown 
leaps and bounds, the accessibility, especially that of the 
internet for differently-abled people is still far-fetched. In this 
modern world, more and more things can be performed online. 
From shopping, ordering food, to booking train tickets 
everything can be done online. For almost all of these online 
facilities a person has to use a website. Using a website can be 
a trivial task for most people but it is very difficult for visually 
impaired people. The internet is a highly visual form of 
communication, different "accessibility blockers" can hinder 
different types of websites, unlike brick and mortar businesses where accessibility can be made by including a ramp for 
wheelchairs or braille interfaces. For example, researchers 
found that 80% of news sites “had significant accessibility 
issues," while 70% of respondents said they were “unable to 
access information and services through governmen t 
websites.” Thus, wanted to come up with a unique way of 
allowing visually impaired people to access the internet. 
Although the W3C has a set of recommendations that stipulate 
the rules to be followed when designing a website for the 
visually impaired, not all websites necessarily stick to the high 
standards in terms of accessibility.   
The major challenge in developing a stable software is to 
include as few keystrokes as possible and to provide an end to 
end experience with the help of voice alone. The inclusion of 
multiple languages and setting the right pace of the speech 
when played back to the user are important factors to consider. 
To support the widespread usage of the software, a crucial 
parameter is the dependency of the software on the local 
environment and operating systems. While the tech has 
evolved greatly, the accessibility, especially the internet for 
the differently abled is still stagnant. 
Assistive technologies such as a screen reader or 
magnifiers can enable visually impaired individuals to access 
the internet. Unfortunately, these screen readers need to keep 
the functionality of the website in mind otherwise it becomes 
difficult to read data from the website. Some of the screen 
readers work only with a particular kind of browser and some 
require the user to remember complex commands thus screen 
readers are not an effective solution to the problem at hand 
and cannot be used to access the internet. 
 There are the following two common themes visible in 
most websites: 
1. Web pages are partially accessible. Some parts are 
usable for the visually impaired, while others are not. 
2. The accessibility of some web pages regressed due to 
updates on the web site. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES 2020)
IEEE Conference Record # 48766; IEEE Xplore ISBN: 978-1-7281-5371-1
978-1-7281-5371-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 1057
Authorized licensed use limited to: Western Sydney University. Downloaded on July 26,2020 at 05:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 